Making Verification Compelling - blog post (#3)
dafny-lang/blog: _posts/2023-04-12-making-verification-compelling-visual-verification-feedback-for-dafny.markdown

---
layout: post
title:  "Making Verification Compelling: Visual Verification Feedback for Dafny"
date:   2023-04-12 18:00:00 +0100
author: Mikael Mayer
---

> <link rel="stylesheet" href="/blog/assets/css/verification-compelling.css"></link>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<link rel="stylesheet" href="/blog/assets/css/verification-compelling.css">
```
Maybe we could group this with the js include.

* **Are there still assertions to prove in my current method?**
  Professional programmers often wrote methods longer than could be displayed on the screen at once. Because postconditions are written at the beginning of a method, such users often needed to scroll back up to see if they finally proved it. Having no contextual information about the entire method verification status was painful.

So many questions that would block not only novice Dafny users, but also expert ones. Using Dafny myself, and supported by the entire Dafny team, I felt the strong need to do something about it.

## Gutter-icon-based verification feedback

Gutter icons brought the first solution in that they offered easy-to-read and enhanced contextual feedback.
You might remember the animated screenshot of [our previous blog post](/blog/2023/03/03/dafny-4-released/):

![Dafny 4 IDE features](/blog/assets/images/Dafny4IDEFeatures.gif)

I'm now going to explain in detail what is happening on the left of the code (the _gutter_), and how I designed it and especially how it answered many of the questions users were asking, sometimes unconciously.

> Numerous test engines also display feedback in the gutter next to the methods themselves, or next to the method calls if they are tests (e.g. [wallabyjs](https://wallabyjs.com/) [xUnit](https://xunit.net/docs/getting-started/netfx/jetbrains-rider)...)}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Numerous test engines also display feedback in the gutter next to the methods themselves, or next to the method calls if they are tests (e.g. [Wallaby.js](https://wallabyjs.com/), [xUnit](https://xunit.net/docs/getting-started/netfx/jetbrains-rider)...).
```

* **Accessibility:** The icons should not just have colors, but also easily recognizable shapes, so that color-blind people could still benefit from them.
* **Compatibility with themes:** The icon colors should be adequate both in light and dark mode.
* **Compatibility with modes:** The icons should work both if the user triggers verification on save, or if verification is triggered each time users type something
* **Context-awareness:** The icons should not just convey the verification status of a single line, but, where appropriate, they may also convey verification feedback about the surrounding context.
* **Past-awareness:** Icons indicating ongoing computation should still display previous verification status, so that it is not lost.
* **No ambiguity:** The icons should be simple, straightforward, and not be ambiguous when looked from the side of the field of vision, so that users can focus on their code.

See below these icons in the current version of Dafny, on Visual Studio Code, when other gutter icon features are disabled.

<div id="fig_static_icons_dark_light"></div>

> [<img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example1.png" alt="Dafny gutter icons on dark theme" width="45%"/>](/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example1.png) [<img src="/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example2.png" alt="Dafny gutter icons on light theme" width="45%"/>](/blog/assets/images/verification-compelling/example2.png)

Reviewer: This turns the images into clickable links. Is that your intention?

Author: Yes it's my intention.

And then, a dreaded thought reappears: "Well, despite all these efforts, how can I be sure that this won't happen?". You remember your other efforts:

- "We did try to make a model out of our algorithms and prove properties, but, well
  only that senior mathematician on another specialized team can understand and maintain it, and they are retiring soon..."
- "My developers have tried using modeling tools themselves but it's like... manipulating mathematics is discouraging..."

If only doing mathematics at the software level was engaging and compelling... and then you remember Dafny and its new features you will have read about in this blog post.

### What?

I'll explain how mathematical reasoning of programs can be made _more_ engaging by increasing the amount of negative, contextual and especially positive feedback in Dafny,
The success was to the point point where a user spontaneously said:
<div style="text-align:center;height:2.2em;font-style:italic">
"It's ridiculous how good all green gutter feels"
</div>

After asking them if we could quote that sentence, another user added _"If he won’t, I say it for you to use"_. A third one said:

> <div style="text-align:center;height:2.2em;font-style:italic">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="quote">
```

* "Resource usage: 9K RU" provides a deterministic metric on how many _resource units_ (RU) the solver used to reach this verification result. Resource units do not fluctuate like time would on multiple iterations, or when running on a different computer, although we found that both are correlated.
* Hovering a _proved_ assertion reveals similar insights, with a positive message instead of an error, such as "Success: The divisior is never zero".
* On hovering the line containing the method, if there are no other hovered assertions, I display a summary of verification as in [Figure 4](#fig_method_summary). This summary provides a link to the notion of [assertion batches]((https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-assertion-batches)) that helps splitting verification in smaller tasks, as well as a unicode warning icon `/!\` with a link to documentation to [fix verification when verification uses more than 10 million RU](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow), a threshold I set by experience.

> * To identify which assertion batches are the slowest and need more work, especially when using the annotation <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert"><code>{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}</code></a>, I displayed the top 3 most expensive assertion batches and line numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To identify which assertion batches are the slowest and need more work, especially when using the annotation [`{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert), I displayed the top 3 most expensive assertion batches and line numbers.
```

Dafny is being used both academic circles to [teach formal reasoning](http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~scd/Dafny_Material/Lectures.pdf), as well as in industrial projects like [IronFleet](https://github.com/microsoft/Ironclad/blob/main/ironfleet/README.md) and [IronClad projects](https://github.com/microsoft/Ironclad/blob/main/ironfleet/README.md), as part of the [AWS Encryption SDK](https://github.com/aws/aws-encryption-sdk-dafny) and as the model to verify the [AWS permission engine](https://aws.amazon.com/verified-permissions/).

Under the hood, Dafny reasons about programs, and can not only prove the absence of run-time exceptions, but also invariants and specific properties relating inputs and outputs.

### A quick introduction to Dafny

By now, you might want to know what does it mean to reason about programs _mathematically_ to avoid bugs that tests might not cover. It's your lucky day, I made an animation to explain the process. Here is an example of an unoptimized program that computes the euclidian division in Dafny. To go to the next step, click "Next".

<div class="step-through">
<div class="step">

> <div class="file" name="euclidian.dfy">

Author: > We could pull this out, too.

What do you mean pull it out? HTML does not have a mechanism to include other html files.

> <div class="file" name="euclidian.dfy">

Reviewer: Isn't that what an iframe does?

> <div class="file" name="euclidian.dfy">

Author: I meant, to include html code raw.

I would not like to use iframes. Let me explain you why
- I store the current animation step on a location;hash so that if someone refreshes the page, they are still in the same step. Also, useful for sharing. iframes have their own URL and location.hash which is not shareable. Starting to write code to interface the two is everything but simple refactoring.
- We already saw that iframes did not work in the context of the index trying to display the blog posts.-

[Figure 3a](#fig_previous_diagnostics) shows that the error was never reported on the post-condition itself before (top image). Following user feedback, on [Figure 3b](#fig_new_diagnostics) I made the error visible on post-conditions, using a red-orange squiggly line in-code &mdash; to indicate it is a secondary error &mdash; and using the regular error icon in the gutter.
Moreover, because hovering is one of first way users can discover features, I added the following improvements to the hover experience, as shown in the bottom of [Figure 3b](#fig_new_diagnostics):

* We quote the exact code portions that Dafny could not prove
* On the <b style="color:blue">Error</b> keyword, the usual color for links, I added a link to documentation we also wrote about how to [fix failing assertions](https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-verification-debugging).
* "This is assertion #1 of 2" explains how many assertions there are and where is this assertion roughly located in verification, which proved to be useful for [splitting verification in smaller tasks using annotations](https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-assertion-batches).

> * "Resource usage: 9K RU" provides a deterministic metric on how many _resource units_ (RU) the solver use to reach this verification result. Resource units do not fluctuate like time would on multiple iterations, or when running on a different computer, although we found that both are correlated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "Resource usage: 9K RU" provides a deterministic metric on how many _resource units_ (RU) the solver used to reach this verification result. Resource units do not fluctuate like time would on multiple iterations, or when running on a different computer, although we found that both are correlated.
```

* Hovering a _proved_ assertion reveals similar insights, with a positive message instead of an error, such as "Success: The divisior is never zero".
* On hovering the line containing the method, if there are no other hovered assertions, I display a summary of verification as in [Figure 4](#fig_method_summary). This summary provides a link to the notion of [assertion batches]((https://dafny.org/latest/DafnyRef/DafnyRef\#sec-assertion-batches)) that helps splitting verification in smaller tasks, as well as a unicode warning icon `/!\` with a link to documentation to [fix verification when verification uses more than 10 million RU](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow), a threshold I set by experience.
* To identify which assertion batches are the slowest and need more work, especially when using the annotation <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert"><code>{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}</code></a>, I displayed the top 3 most expensive assertion batches and line numbers.

# Summary

> I explained why Dafny, how Dafny works, how gutter icons enhance the verification experience, how I designed the icons, and how I enhanced verification feedback using suitable hover messages. With this, I believe that it made the Dafny verification experience more accessible, more positive, and more enjoyable, for both new and existing users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I explained why Dafny, how Dafny works, how gutter icons enhance the verification experience, how I designed the icons, and how I enhanced verification feedback using suitable hover messages. This, I believe, made the Dafny verification experience more accessible, more positive, and more enjoyable, for both new and existing users.
```

The story is not finished, but I hope that you enjoyed this first chapter!

# Acknowledgments

> Adrianna Corona, for co-designing the icons and the user experience with me with deep user needs in mind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adrianna Corona, for co-designing the icons and the user experience, while keeping the user needs in mind.
```

> Aaron Tomb, for making positive versions of every error message and providing feedback on this paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aaron Tomb, for making positive versions of every error message and providing feedback on this post.
```

Ryan Emery, for being the first to ask me for gutter feedback à la [Wallaby.js](https://wallabyjs.com/).

> Remy Willems for restructuring the back-end of the language server and for the numerous code reviews.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remy Willems, for restructuring the back-end of the language server and for the numerous code reviews.
```

> Clement Pit Claudel for reviewing the wording of the hover messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clément Pit-Claudel, for reviewing the wording of the hover messages.
```

> Robin Salkeld, for the discussion about displaying resource units and the design of <a href="https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert"><code>{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}</code></a>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Robin Salkeld, for the discussion about displaying resource units and the design of [`{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}`](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert).
```

> Rustan Leino, who I owe most of the content of the sections of Verification Debugging, that I wrote gradually after participating in sessions where he was helping professional programmers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rustan Leino, who inspired most of the content of the sections of Verification Debugging, which I wrote gradually after participating in sessions where he helped professional programmers.
```
